Update EIP-4750: align with EOF Megaspec (#8312)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-4750.md

### New execution state in EVM

> A return stack is introduced, separate from the operand stack. It is a stack of items representing execution state to return to after function execution is finished. Each item is comprised of: code section index, offset in the code section (PC value).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A return stack is introduced, separate from the operand stack. It is a stack of items representing execution state to return to after function execution is finished. Each item is comprised of code section index and offset in the code section (PC value).
```

First we define several helper values:

- `type[i].inputs = type_section_contents[i * 4]` - number of inputs of ith section
- `type[i].outputs = type_section_contents[i * 4 + 1]` - number of outputs of ith section
- `type[i].max_stack_height = type_section_contents[i * 4 + 2:i * 4 + 4]` - maximum operand stack height of ith section

If the code is valid EOF1, the following execution rules apply:

#### `CALLF`

1. Has one immediate argument,`target_section_index`, encoded as a 16-bit unsigned big-endian value.

> 3. If operand stack size exceeds `1024 - type[target_section_index].max_stack_height + type[target_section_index].inputs` (i.e. if the called function may exceed the global stack height limit), execution results in exceptional halt. This also guarantees that the stack height after the call is within the limits.

Reviewer: I would leave point 2, with some rephrasing, it was added already with stack validation in mind (https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/6261/files)
```suggestion
2. EOF validation guarantees that operand stack has enough items to use as callee's inputs.
3. If operand stack size exceeds `1024 - type[target_section_index].max_stack_height + type[target_section_index].inputs` (i.e. if the called function may exceed the global stack height limit), execution results in exceptional halt. This also guarantees that the stack height after the call is within the limits.
```

4. If return stack already has `1024` items, execution results in exceptional halt.
5. Charges 5 gas.
6. Pops nothing and pushes nothing to operand stack.
7. Pushes to return stack an item:

   ```
   (code_section_index = current_section_index, 
   offset = PC_post_instruction)
   ```
   
   Under `PC_post_instruction` we mean the PC position after the entire immediate argument of `CALLF`.
   
   *Note:* Code validation rules of [EIP-5450](./eip-5450.md) guarantee there is always an instruction following `CALLF` (since terminating instruction or unconditional jump is required to be final one in the section), therefore `PC_post_instruction` always points to an instruction inside section bounds.
8. Sets `current_section_index` to `target_section_index` and `PC` to `0`, and execution continues in the called section.

#### `RETF`

1. Does not have immediate arguments.

> 3. Charges 3 gas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. EOF validation guarantees that operand stack has exact number of items to use as outputs.
3. Charges 3 gas.
```

4. Pops nothing and pushes nothing to operand stack.

> 5. Pops an item from return stack and sets `current_section_index` and `PC` to values from this item.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Pops an item from return stack and sets `current_section_index` and `PC` to values from this item.

Note: EOF validation requirement for 0th section to be non-returning guarantees that return stack cannot be empty before `RETF`.
```

3. `RJUMP`, `RJUMPI` and `RJUMPV` immediate argument value (jump destination relative offset) validation:
    1. Code section is invalid in case offset points to a position outside of section bounds.
    2. Code section is invalid in case offset points to one of two bytes directly following `CALLF` instruction.

> 4. First code section is invalid if it contains a `RETF` instruction.

Author: This is superseded by non-returning functions in 6206, but those aren't a thing in 4750 yet, so this rule needs to be added for completeness

Reviewer: Stack validation also is defined in a later EIP, yet we're speccing this out having it in mind. So I think it's fine to refer to unreachableness, I added a suggestion about to `RETF` section. This item here I would probably remove.

(it's also not complete, code section is also invalid if it contains `JUMPF` to returning)

Author: > (it's also not complete, code section is also invalid if it contains JUMPF to returning)

But JUMPF in particular is not yet known, and is not required for this spec (also including 5450, as linked and mentioned) to be complete.

I think the point (4.) makes the spec self-contained and independent of at least one EIP (6206). One can also argue that it makes 4750 compatible with 6206 - the rule in 6206 is a generalization of this (4.) one, and by that, 6206 doesn't invalidate code which would be otherwise valid without 6206.

I would prefer to strive to decouple the EIPs wherever possible, like here we're making 6206 an optional extension to 4750. 5450 is much harder to leave out from this EIP than 6206

Author: @gumb0 I pushed a version of the document still decoupled from 6206, as I would suggest to proceed, but have a version with 6206 referenced (w/ JUMPF and non-returning fs, more in line with your suggestion) stashed away.

PTAL, I would opt to remain decoupled from 6206 as long as reasonably possible.

Reviewer: I think trying to make EIPs independent of each other is a lost cause by now. 

My concern is potential confusion for the people reading two EIPs, seeing these two different versions of the validation rule and needing to go through mental effort to figure out how these versions relate to each other and what supersedes what. It's not trivial to figure out, it's formulated very differently in 6206.

Author: > I think trying to make EIPs independent of each other is a lost cause by now.

For 3540, after feedback received, we strived to remove as many dependencies as possible, see [here](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/8152#pullrequestreview-1922905668) and [here](https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/8152/commits/b45d6076c2e9bd59b211eb9e4d1e0d85eff089ed).

I think we're giving up too early on this 4750->6206 reference, and should also make the effort to decouple. That's also the main reason for the EIPs - to spec out new concepts in isolation, without needing to jump around different docs.

> My concern is potential confusion for the people reading two EIPs, seeing these two different versions of the validation rule and needing to go through mental effort to figure out how these versions relate to each other and what supersedes what. It's not trivial to figure out, it's formulated very differently in 6206.

This is a fair point, there should be no confusion, but I think it is not that bad, as the 4750 rules are generalized (not superseded really, I used a wrong word) and made implicit by 6206 rules. I reread 6206 and it seems fine to me.

I pushed the "6206-ish" version in a commit [a12f35ec](https://github.com/pdobacz/EIPs/commit/a12f35ec0f900c33748f8cbbbad199f7e16a67d5) for comparison. The diff is really small and shows the 6206 rules generalize 4750 rules nicely. And if there still remains risk of confusion, maybe better to clarify in 6206 ("rule x generalizes rule y from 4750" or just generally "Some rules generalize rules introduced in 4750")

> 5. No unreachable sections are allowed, i.e. every section is referenced by at least one non-recursive `CALLF`, and section 0 is implicitly reachable.

Author: not sure if this belongs here or in 5450

Reviewer: I would say here, as it's not related to stack validation.

Author: okay, good. I asked b/c I thought I've seen such checks included in the spec/algo for stack validation, maybe  I confused them with unreachable code within sections. Leaving this point in here then.

> 5. No unreachable sections are allowed, i.e. every section is referenced by at least one non-recursive `CALLF`, and section 0 is implicitly reachable.

Reviewer: To reflect new aspect that was discovered recently
```suggestion
5. No unreachable sections are allowed, i.e. every section can be reached from section 0 with a series of `CALLF`/`JUMPF` instructions.
```

Author: 1. as above, I would leave JUMPF out. I also don't think it's ok to mention an entire new opcode not introduced here, without linking 6206. And the latter we don't want to do for obvious reasons
2. I think we should leave "section 0 being reachable" in, if we're pedantic.

### Execution

1. Execution starts at the first byte of the first code section, and PC is set to 0.
2. Return stack is initialized empty.

> 3. Stack underflow check is not performed anymore.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Stack underflow check is not performed anymore. EOF stack validation guarantees that it cannot happen at run-time.
```

3. Stack overflow check is not performed anymore, except during `CALLF` as specified above.

## Rationale

### `RETF` in the top frame ends execution vs exceptionally halts vs is just not allowed

Alternative logic for `RETF` in the top frame could be to allow it during code validation and make it end execution. This would mean that return stack is initialized with a pair of zeros, and `RETF` ends execution when return stack is empty.

> An argument in favor of such alternative (as opposed to exceptionally halt) was always having at least one item in the return stack, and avoiding a special case for empty stack in the interpreter loop return stack underflow check.

Reviewer: I don't think it makes sense to mention this obsolete motivation, I would shrink this section:

```
Alternative logic for `RETF` in the top frame could be to allow it during code validation and make it either end execution or exceptionally halt. This would mean that return stack is initialized with a pair of zeros, and `RETF` ends execution or aborts when return stack is empty.

This has been superseded with the validation rule of top frame being non-returning, because validating non-returning status of functions is valuable by itself for other reasons. Therefore all considerations of runtime behavior of `RETF` in the top frame were obsoleted.
```

Author: sounds good, with the caveat I'd not mention the "top frame being non-returning" term, same reasons as above. "Top frame not containing RETF" should be the equivalent term not leveraging 6206. But agreed with compressing the reasoning. Let's discuss the 6206 thing first, and then I'll fix here accordingly

Author: on second read I noticed that the shrinked version is somewhat imprecise, b/c it conflates two earlier designs:
- empty return stack on `RETF` => abort
- emptied return stack after `RETF` => end execution.

I'll try to rephrase this
